hey everyone welcome to the smart
economy podcast a production of neonews
today.com I'm your host Dylan Grabowski
in this episode of the smart economy
podcast I sat down and spoke with Lars
sire Christensen the chairman of the
concordium foundation concordium is a
layer 1 public blockchain that was
conceptualized in 2018 and seeks to
offer scalability security
decentralization and regulation the
Builders of the network aim to offer
these utilities by leveraging digital
identity zero knowledge proofs instant
finality and sharding among other
strategies in this conversation Lars and
I talk about building an online trading
platform in the very early days of the
internet new technologies and their
adoption Cycles the importance of
digital identification discovering
Bitcoin early on how concordium seeks to
provide certain features that other
blockchains don't natively provide and
so much more just a reminder nothing
said on this podcast is a solicitation
to buy or sell any tokens that nothing
should be taken as Financial advice and
that the host or guests May hold tokens
discussed in any given episode with that
said I really enjoyed chatting with Lars
and I hope you enjoy the conversation
too
hey everyone welcome to the smart
economy podcast today we are joined by
Lars sire Christensen the chairman of
the concordium foundation how are you
doing today Lars I'm very well thank you
I'm really excited to jump into this
conversation with you because in digging
through the work you do and the work
you're doing with concordium right now
it's all very built upon a Well
established layer of essentially being
in an Innovative space for the past
three decades
so I kind of want to jump off asking
about your role as a co-founder at saxo
bank which is or was a financial
multi-asset trading and investment
platform
so can you just share with us a little
bit about what the Genesis was like for
creating this platform in the late 90s
when not everyone was using the internet
yeah happy too and that's also I think a
connection to one thing to do to the
next big technology here but me and my
my partner then came from they have were
early adopters of of the internet at the
time and and I see actually a lot of
parallels between early internet and
early blockchain you know that was a
pretty nerdy space back in the day right
and and we uh we were very small Brokers
that later became a bank and uh and we
saw here's some way that maybe we can
differentiate ourselves a bit and uh so
why don't we try to build an online
trading platform and and we went ahead
and did that there wasn't many around I
think we were the third or the fourth
online trading platform in the world
when we launched and there was probably
less than 50 million users on the
internet so uh but we sort of uh did the
best we could and put together the
training platform and and while a lot of
people were very skeptical of the idea
of trading online at the time uh you
gotta say that that worked out quite
nicely because today nearly all trading
in in areas of Foreign Exchange and
derivatives and and even stocks are done
online so that of course was uh was a
great early mover Advantage we got there
and and an interesting learning curve
and and also probably made me look for
the next big transformative technology
on an ongoing basis and uh I actually
think blockchain is and and has a
similar transformative potential to the
one we saw back in the day on the
internet but it was fun to be early in
that space as well and actually quite
parallel with a lot of Skeptics uh not
that many uses uh very nerdy interaction
before browsers Etc so I think it's it
hosts on relevant learnings for the
process that blockchain equips is going
through at the moment what were some of
the early assets that you were trading
at saxo bank and what did like the
regulatory approval process look like
back when you first started so the first
asset we really traded was foreign
exchange because it was like a Mainstay
of our old world business if you will
our old telephone based business so it
was fun exchange and then over the years
we added U.S classes and uh and today
actually six Banks platform is is one of
the broadest multi-acid Platforms in the
world with with tens of thousands of
different assets across multiple asset
classes but what we started out with
foreign exchange which in many ways also
could be like the little bit to trading
with which opens uh and coins just in in
the theater space right which was a very
elitist Market at the time because you
used to as I said sit and do this
dealing on Telephone meant that you know
you could handle two four clients Max at
a time and you know things move around
big numbers so you simply couldn't uh
have a large client base which meant
that you obviously uh prioritized your
larger clients and and online trading
completely democratized that so that
everybody had the same service and in
fact a better service than we were able
to provide over telephone so it was also
something that made that market explode
over time with many many more users and
and much better service and much better
pricing so did you notice the growth in
saxo bank at the time after you
democratized the way that people were
able to trade in Forex or trade into
these other assets as more and more
people are able to communicate online
and you're not kind of limited to the
amount of hands that you have with a
phone were you able to notice that the
growth in saxo's business was relative
to that of the internet in where there
were more internet users they were just
more likely to search for these types of
training platforms and land on saxo's
web page or did you have to do kind of
like concerted marketing efforts to
onboard new users and to walk them
through what the internet was and to
kind of do these processes like we might
be seeing with folks who are learning
how to use blockchain today yeah I think
again a lot of parallels actually it
wasn't very successful the first couple
of years because people didn't really
trust the internet oh they were worried
about the Millennium box if you have
heard about that this terrible accident
that was going to have New Year's Eve on
the year 2000 which where absolutely
nothing happened in the end and people
were concerned about Security on the the
internet also of course there were very
few uses so although it was a clear
clear Improvement on on sitting with the
phones it actually took a couple of
years to to really get a significant
traction on it and and a lot of people
at that time you have to remember were
sort of remember speaking to many
Executives from the industry saying why
are you wasting your money on this it's
it's never going to work and the
internet is a fad and it'll go away
after a few years people always want to
speak to a dealer right so uh it was
interesting in the parallel but it was
actually quite a slow start then
something happened in the 2000 2001 2002
that people actually began to trust
interaction on the internet better and
and then I think it was a combination of
uh people beginning to see the obvious
improvements to earlier times uh
interaction with with Traders and
secondly of course the general growth of
the internet and then as I said also the
democratizing so you went from a
relatively small big ticket trading
Community to being a much more
widespread community of traders in in
that space and many of those have
actually pulled over into crypto because
the difference between trading a fiat
currency and trading in token is not
really that that great right the
underlying assets is different but the
method is the same right so it was a
combination of lack of enthusiasm or
knowledge in the beginning and then
people realizing the obvious and then a
flood of our business beginning to come
in right and I think it's it's going to
be much like this in uh in in blockchain
as well you know you have a skepticism
you have still too much nerdiness for
interaction you need some easier
gateways so so people can access this
easily possibly without even thinking
about that they're using a blockchain
right they're just reaping the benefits
of an underlying blockchain without
having to really have a PhD in
cryptography to use it right just like
we're talking now on the internet but we
don't give it a we don't give it a
second thought right we don't need to
understand how the internet works or
have a very nerdy background to use it
right so that's going to be for me the
main breakthrough for blockchain when it
gets easier to use and obviously people
will just explain insurance benefits
from doing so in terms of more security
and better registration of data and
assets Etc right I just wanted I forgot
one thing you asked about regulation and
actually regulation was relatively new
in Europe in the mid 90s you know uh
prior to that it started a bit earlier
in the UK in London and mid 80s but
prior to that the traditional Financial
Services were were pretty much Wild West
a little bit like early in the
blockchain and crypto days right and
then regulation came first in the Middle
Ages in in London the midnights is in
the in Europe where we were based in EU
and of course it changed it wasn't
particularly related to the online part
of it it was just general regulation of
interaction with clients because it
wasn't very strong prior to that and of
course that led to a number of changes
in in how people did business in the
industry and a number of new things they
had to live up to and people quite
worried about it just like people are
worried in blockchain today about what
you're going to do to us right what's it
going to mean to us and and of course it
forces you into some some processes and
some practices that uh that may mean
that you have to adjust your business
model or spend additional time on
certain aspects that you don't see as
immediately value driving Etc but but I
think the Silver Lining that people need
to understand is that once an area is
appropriately regulated the trust the
generation in potential users uh the
fact that you have a framework within
people which people are comfortable well
that would lead to a much faster
adoption eventually and and we saw that
you know the the traditional financial
sector prior to these regulatory
initiatives were much much smaller than
what it was 10 or 20 years later or
today so so yes it gives you some
additional uh work to do but on the
other hand it's a foundation of growing
a serious business I'm very sure that'll
repeat itself here and I I hope people
remember that part and when they're
worried about regulation it's actually
going to assist their business grow on
and and be much more successful assuming
they're willing to to live up to it of
course yeah I appreciate that you're
you're bringing the parallels to the
concerns that regulation might have had
as the internet was coming of age and
the parallels to crypto today one of the
things I always say I'm a millennial
some of my earliest memories actually
are using the internet I've been using
the internet since the the mid 90s so
I'm kind of Internet native and so what
I always see or say to folks who might
be Skeptics of cryptocurrencies and
blockchains is that ignoring blockchains
today is like ignoring the internet in
the 90s so excuse me if I keep hammering
home on this but I just find it
fascinating to be having a conversation
with someone who essentially built a
brand new business in the wild west of
the internet in the late 90s so I can
understand why you have your conviction
in crypto today but but I'm curious what
was your conviction for the internet in
the late 90s when there were only 50
million users in the world all of your
peers and colleagues are calling you
crazy there was no previous precedent
before like today I can say we saw the
internet explode and that's why
blockchain is going to explode but there
wasn't that in the 90s there wasn't a
pre-internet internet so what was it
when you guys launched your trading
platform online where did the conviction
come from what kept you going especially
during those first few years when you
weren't really gaining traction well I
would say uh and I share many of you a
views and observations interesting that
you were also that the time because I
think it is valuable for this industry
to learn from that process right now I
don't know if you can say that there
wasn't precedence to it like the PC back
in the day also completely changed the
world you know so that occasionally
these sort of major game changing events
and uh and like you just guess you could
say the mobile phone or the the
smartphone also was a similar transition
a 15 18 years ago whenever that was
right but uh I think it was so obviously
a better solution to many things on
Improvement and so back to the internet
now it was such an obvious Improvement
to so many processes in terms of
Distributing information Distributing
data
Etc that that you know I think actually
Mark Andreessen put it very well back in
the early 90s when he did the first
browser and he said uh we we don't know
what we're going to use it for but we
know it's going to be something big
about the internet right and I have a
little bit the same feeling here with
blockchain right it's hard to predict
what the killer use case is going to be
right and it was in the mid 90s uh very
hard to predict what the big use case
was going to be now we happen to have a
financial institution we saw that it
could improve our service and our
processes and everything we really
around what we're doing so we gave it a
shot but and other people gave it a shot
in their Industries right and the
weirdest things worked out and other
things didn't right but like think about
eBay eBay I don't know if you recall was
was built on the face of people that
collected sweet containers and liked to
exchange them right so they built this
platform so they could exchange the
sweet packaging so that they had
collected in the physical world he said
with other and then they build on to
that right but of course at the time not
a lot of not anybody were thinking about
social media to the extent that that
became a huge success uh Google hadn't
really reared its face yet so obviously
if we had had that kind of foresight
would have built Facebook or Google
instead of sex a bank right but but I
think it's very parallel here you know
you can see that blockchain is so
relevant to anything really involving
data right and and what business model
does people updated today and who
wouldn't want to have safer data more
immutable data and more structured data
more more searchable data and in essence
I actually think blockchain is what the
internet has that's the aspect of the
internet has been missing all the time
right because the internet is so so easy
to fake it on it's so easy to be on
through full on you know you can do
everything fake you have no idea who
you're interacting with or uh you don't
know who the email is coming from to be
honest uh very shortly we can't even be
sure that it's you and me sitting
talking here it'll be so easy to make an
avatar of each of us and and copy our
voice and copy our our toner voice right
so the internet there's biggest fault
line really is the lack of being able to
to identify and and be absolutely sure
what you're dealing with and this is the
aspect that blockchain brings to the
party right and and that goes for so
many industrial processes so many fun
processes uh and entertainment areas Etc
that that I have very much much the same
feeling as Mark and reason expressed it
back then we know it's going to be big
but it's hard to say exactly what it's
going to be uh what's going to be the
absolutely killer use cases so you got
to try your way but one thing that I am
sure about just and I should mention
that also that a very important part of
the bank's business was to build this
platform not just for ourselves but as
an infrastructure for other financial
institutions so there's about 100 francs
of Brokers today using the
infrastructure that we built and one
thing is for sure that blockchain also
meets very solid infrastructure right
and where I think a lot of people are
sort of on layer one that's so last year
I don't think there's a really well
functioning layer one out there uh yet
you know either it has lack of of
scalability or it hasn't found the
balance between privacy and
accountability or or it can actually
it's not as secure as it claims to be
because you can roll it back if you're
being controlling the system blah blah
blah so that problem is by no homies
last year right and and that is what
we're trying to solve a concordium is to
provide that rock solid piece of
infrastructure that can take that role
and infrastructure for me is always
really the place to be the most
interesting place right you can build
many apps they go in and out of fashion
they most of them don't ever get
traction but a piece of infrastructure
that can support all the people people
in in building great great Innovative
stuff but on a solid foundation tends to
last right and that being said of course
we we will also see some rotation in in
preferred layer ones because some of the
ones that are being used out there just
don't take the boxes that I mentioned
but people maybe not fully Industries
not fully mature enough to really do the
kind of check due billions that a big
corporate would do is implemented a new
new piece of technology you touched on a
lot of things that I want to I want to
bring out throughout this conversation
such as the prevalence of AI and the
ability to perform deep fakes and this
is something that kind of piqued my
interest in to concordium was the focus
on identity but before we kind of like
delve into why you took up the fight to
build a new public layer L1 something
that you've spoken about in in your
previous interviews and something that I
find fascinating is that you take a very
bottom-up approach it's not necessarily
a company or a corporation an Enterprise
or a government that's going to say use
this technology and that's how it gets
becomes pervasive in society you've kind
of alluded to in your previous
conversations that it's really the
adoption from the Grassroots from the
bottom up where these architectures and
infrastructures that you're speaking
about really rise to prominence so maybe
you could just share a little bit of
your philosophy about why the everyday
person and is so important when it comes
to adopting these new infrastructures
well when you are building a new
Foundation really for for the global
economy which I think the blockchain
industry is it is not typically driven
from the top down the internet wasn't
driven tucked down at all right it was a
bunch of notes like uh aspect in the day
that thought this was fun and
interesting and uh and we started
building stuff you know it wasn't the
government that built specs from Hank it
wasn't the government that built
browsers and and it shouldn't you know
in my view I'm not a huge government fan
because you need the Innovation and and
lots of Minds to try to create their
their own thing right now now there's
another mind in town and that's a
completely different conversation and
what what the eye is going to do to us
all but uh in general you know these
things have to be built bottom up also
because they typically are based on on
low fees and or no fees and and
facilitation of stuff you need the mass
adoption for for many of these models to
work you know Facebook was 250 000
paying users wouldn't work right in fact
there were people that built earlier
Facebook clones but went down that road
and and didn't make it right so clearly
this industry is ultimately going to be
dependent on mass adoption right apart
from exchanges there's not a lot of
people making any money whatsoever in
this industry and it's still investment
heavy right there so I I believe in
people seeing the actual benefit to them
in their everyday life that the things
that they can now do experiences they
can now have that they couldn't have
before and it's for us that build stuff
to make those things as easy to access
as interesting and as groundbreaking and
new ways of looking at things and new
ways of making free people feel safer
which I really think is if I should put
a tagline to concordium that is what we
do we try to build a safer digital world
right and that applies as much to a big
corporate or a public sector project as
it applies to to people just wanting to
know that when they buy an energy it's
actually issued by the person that
claims to own the IPR in that digital
file you know it's normal people out
there want to know that if they interact
with somebody socially on a social media
that that it is in fact the person that
that they think it is I think also with
meta verses and virtual realities I'm a
great believer in I think we
sooner rather than later but certainly
in the longer run we'll be living large
parts of our daily life in Virtual
environments because they're going to be
very lifelike and they're going to be
much more interesting than most of our
lives right and again there it's such a
such a fertile breeding ground for for
people faking it right but if you're not
even seeing people but you're seeing
their avatars or however they want to
show themselves you know that can be
fine if you're dancing around to a
virtual concert who cares right but if
you if you want to do a piece of
business or or you want to have a social
relation with somebody you might want to
know who they are you know I liken it in
the old world too so like if you're
going to a bar you're quite comfortable
having a beer without asking everybody
around you for their passports right but
it's one of them want to bet on the
football match on the screen you know
and you bet an amount and he says oh
I'll pay you tomorrow if I lose and then
you probably do want to know who he is
right and then it's it's convenient if
you can identify himself so I see this
as a as an author to people I also see
very much a self-sovereign play in it uh
so when I do play because we have given
away far too much of our identity to the
big current Tech platforms that that
make you sum some money on on our
identities but actually uh those should
be under our control and we should share
them carefully with people when we feel
it's the right thing to do and if
there's a monetization to be made on it
then we should also receive part of that
monetization right there so so there's
many things at play here but the
fundamental building block in the world
in my view is actually ID right if I
cannot be sure that you're a Dylan and
you cannot be sure that I'm lost I mean
what's the meaning of this interview
right if I cannot be sure that that you
in fact are from a podcast and then you
are going to release this why should we
spend an hour together here right and
and then this this confidence that that
and intelligently build idea can give
people I think will be also incredibly
important for Mass adoption right
because for sure a corporate's not going
to enter into a system if half of its
users are Anonymous right in the
financial sector it would be illegal
even but in many many in Industries you
even want to venture down that route
right but I also think for for normal
users when we when we're just uh looking
around the digital world you know there
will be multiple locations where we want
to know what we're dealing with and
other cases where we don't care so much
right I think another thing is ideas so
uh binary today right obviously binary
per se is per se is binary either you're
dealing or you're not is or not but also
if you go down to the kiosk and you have
to prove that you're over 18 right
because you want to buy something it
hasn't been a problem for me for a few
years but but it is for young for a
young person right today you have to
actually give the person behind the
counter all of the information including
perhaps your home address your your
exact age your social security number
Etc and that can be abused right now the
only thing that guy behind the counter
needs to know is you're over 18 right
and with Advanced your knowledge proofs
and and control of ID you can show him
exactly that with Beyond question yes
I'm over 18 but I don't have to tell you
my name I don't have to tell you that
I'm resting in this or that country I
don't I certainly don't have to give you
my address and I don't have to give you
a an ID that you can go and copy in the
back room and then defraud me right so
this whole thing about giving people
back control of their ideas is very
critical and and only on the basis of
that in my view you can allow then a lot
of privacy between people and I think a
lot of the early generations of
blockchain essentially got it completely
wrong you have two Anonymous parties
interacting but everybody can see
everything they do right and that that's
not how the world works right in a bank
account you know who owns it if you're
the bank and anybody that needs to
transfer money will will know but we
don't flash the contents of that on the
internet right people don't need to know
everything about you so we're kind of
flipping that at compodium and saying
you know that you're dealing with a
person that's been willing to ID pay him
myself or corporate it's not just
personal ID you know that you can trust
it if you exchange some of that
information you can trust that it's true
but apart from that if you want to do
something in private then you should be
allowed to do it right so we're trying
to flip back to how the world really
works and should work I I think ID is a
very very critical component in this
it's also a post Critical with all the
regulation that's going to come in and
it's coming in now I was actually a very
early adopter also this space and I
think I bought my first Bitcoin in 2011
or 2012 maybe right then I was very
enthusiastic about it but I got also a
bit skeptical along the way because I
can see so many hurdles from Mass
adoption right uh you know the text not
scalable the anonymity the the initial
lack of of certainty because you you
don't have finality layers uh which is
another thing we build a Concordia map
so that's why I sat down one evening and
decided to say Let me let me get my shot
at it let's take all the best things
from a decentralized system which I'm a
great deal you were in no single punch
of failure no central control of the
system but married to uh how the how the
world is gonna look a few years down the
line when regulation is also implemented
here because of course we will have
regulation that that's so evident there
and it will uh it will continue to come
you know also here people have perhaps
learned from as an example the trade
advice sector many people think now oh
yeah a regulation a little video trading
but let's get an advice and then we'll
move on in two years time right now I
have news for you that's not how
regulation works right regulation will
be a continuous stream of initiatives
till the end of time right so it's not
like two years from now everything will
be settled and we know what to do you
will have to continuously adjust to new
regulation coming in because that's how
regulation works you know it identifies
an activity it tries to understand it if
it's a good regulator takes some
feedback for the people that execute
that particular activity then it comes
up with proposals and hearings and and
ultimately some politician votes for it
and he said well yes you have to follow
it and it's going to continue like that
forever because that's what it does
everywhere else in society right I love
the the example you brought up when it
comes to Identity we've grown up in a
world where when you go to the bar here
in the states if you go to the bar you
have to be 21 or older where we just
show a form of identification and now
the bartender knows where I live what
county I'm in they have access to way
much more information than they really
need when they really only needed to
verify one thing if I was born on a
certain day or after that so that's kind
of like the example I use to kind of
relay the importance of what kind of of
information we share with people and we
should feel like we have the right to be
able to share with people so it's really
interesting to hear you you touch upon
that and also finality as well with with
concordium so many really cool things
that you're implementing into the to the
L1 uh you did mention that you got into
Bitcoin you bought your first Bitcoin in
2011 you're an OG what was your thought
process like when ethereum came out and
there were smart contract functionality
were you trying to figure out identity
Solutions and finality solutions for
Bitcoin between 2011 and when ethereum
came out in 2016 to this new public
blockchain change your perception about
the way that blockchain networks could
be used what did that Evolution look
like for you when a smart contract
platform came around I like the ethereum
edition of the smart contract very much
at the time right because uh there was
really only Bitcoin right and people are
sort of thinking this is the beginning
and the end of it all and it's going to
rule the world and again that's not how
the real world works right so I was
always sure that some smart people were
gonna do more with this technology and
the team was the first example Now by
Third chance a lot of those guys were
sitting in a villa down in Stu in
Switzerland and I live about an hour's
drive from there so I actually knew the
guys before they started and I liked
that project very much in fact I still
have occasionally people thanking me
because I put up a Facebook post well
before the launch of ethereum and said
you know if you like Bitcoin you should
have a look at this one so I a few
people vote on the original auction due
to that and they're still sending me
thank you notes for making them
millionaires right but so I like that
very much and I think the smart contract
was was a great addition to the whole
Space right and I wasn't at that time I
was still when I first saw Bitcoin I
thought it was it was intellectually
stimulating and but to be honest I was
also looking at it could this be an
asset that we could have on the sex Bank
trade platform right because it looked
it looked like I can't see it looked
like I can't see it talked like a
concert you know it probably was a
currency right and that wasn't as
obvious at the time as as it is today
because nobody were really trading it
right a few people were buying but uh
not really a trading volumes at the time
and actually we didn't eventually
implemented in in uh sexual bank at the
time because my legal and compliance did
it backwards flip flick back when I when
I suggested it and it didn't seem like a
like a fight worth having at the time
right so I I regret that to this day
because we could easily have been the
first bank to support that space right
but but you know you can't uh you can't
cry over spilled milk right I would say
at that time I was still just generally
quite enthusiastic and Ambassador among
friends and family for Bitcoin and then
the subsequently ethereum and it was
only around sort of a little later than
began to find it very hard to reconcile
my day job as the CEO of saxo Bank where
I was inundated with regulation all the
time and this complete review free
wheeling dealing Wild West and I I just
I just couldn't reconcile the two things
in my mind and that's when I began to
think you know this will also be
regulated in the same way this will
because it was beginning to look more
more like Financial assets some of the
things and if it's a financial asset
it's going to get regulated that's just
the way it is right so it was around
about the launch of ethereum and and
1516 that I began thinking a lot about
it it was a very unpopular message at
the time because that this new new uh
environment there wanted their free
world and they wanted their their
freedom from government and and and
Banks and the financial system and I I
kind of sympathize I'm a bit of an
anarchist at heart you know but uh but
unfortunately also forced to some
realism when you're the CEO of an
investment Bank yeah so I sympathize
with those I is but I never really
believe that it would be allowed to
continue that way and obviously it's
evident to everybody now but it
certainly wasn't at the time right so
traveling with that message guys we have
a problem with the anonymity we have a
problem with uh with with sort of no
regard for how trading and and the icos
were clearly you know uh they were
clearly defect so many IPOs you know
which which would of course be heavily
regulated then and we never did raise
money that way because it was sure that
it's kind of come and bite you off and
later later because the other thing a
regulator is somewhat backwards looking
even though the law only comes today you
can still get punished or pursued for
for something you did years before if
they feel that you should evidently have
known better right so so uh we never did
icos or anything like that only private
placements it's only to non-us Citizens
also because we also know that they have
very very
stringent views on that and a lot of
opaqueness actually around it even today
in traditional financial sector so so we
made very clear to be self-compliant
kind if you will even though there was
nothing to comply to because I was
convinced at the time that that this
space
would go in the direction that it's now
going uh well and hence I'm not so
worried about it I think as I said
there's a silver lining in it because it
will bring more business to the space
once people feel more comfortable with
it and feel that they operate in a in a
safe environment that they can trust and
to be honest you've seen a lot of
excesses in this space in the early days
where people basically got wrapped with
their money right and that's not good
for confidence
so it sounds like you've been kind of
seeing a lot of issues with these public
blockchain networks and you've seen the
pros and the cons of the digital assets
as as they've come along you liked
Bitcoin you're an anarchist at heart and
and you liked some of that sort of
freedom of the market perspective and
and ultimate individuality and then when
ethereum comes around you say hey wow
there's some utility here we can start
to use these networks in ways that are
Beyond just uh a currency that bitcoin's
acting like but it sounds like even when
ethereum came out there were still
issues that you were having that you
felt like a project under your direction
or that you were a part of leading you
could affect some different types of
changes so when did you start
conceptualizing concordium like
officially was it after the Ico run when
was it that you kind of like got a group
together you put pen to paper and you're
like all right we're gonna do this I
checked it in my calendar because it was
a very specific event and so I can tell
you with certainty it was the 13th of
December 2017 because I had a Christmas
lunch in Zurich with a leading figure in
the industry and I was sharing my
misgivings you know anonymity lack of
scalability lack of this and lack of
that and this poor job just threw up his
arms and said if you're so unhappy with
everything why don't you build your own
blockchain
and I checked when the once when that
date was and it was 13th of December
2017. so I went home and I I said yeah
maybe you're right you know because you
you're building these with small teams
much much smaller teams that we had in
the bank for example where we had a
thousand I.T Engineers so why not it
can't be that complicated right and it
isn't actually so that was the very day
and I went home that evening and I said
yeah the guy is right you know you can't
just sit and complain you know so I sat
down and made a checklist which is
pretty much the one we we built the
project from and and then we took it
from there in early 18 right that person
I was the gave me very good advice
because I don't really know how to build
a blockchain so how should I do it and
he said you should start with the
science right because this is
cryptography it needs to be solid it
needs to be Unbreakable and that's
founded for me like Sound Advice so I uh
I got in touch with a couple of
scientists from graphic scientists I was
very happy to find out that I didn't
know at the time but very happy to find
out that one of the world's leading
cryptographic science department
actually is at the Danish University I'm
Danish myself so that was helpful that I
didn't have to go to the end of the
world and they already knew me from
saxophone and they were excited and said
yeah we'd love to build that together
with you right uh so I started actually
with building a science team and we
still have in my view one of the best if
not the best science team behind any
blockchain really really impressive
figures that actually have built some of
the so-called cryptographic Primitives
that are in general use in all of the
blockchain industry like the the the
hash code between blocks was invented by
my Elite scientist that even them got
back in in 1989 so it was a very strong
science team just because I wanted to
make sure that we got that bit right and
then I built a tech team from that which
is a little more traditional like I knew
I had learned how to build Tech in tax
bank so it's not that sort of five guys
and girls in a garage type job but
building a team that actually thought
about architecture and documentation and
formal verification of smart contracts
and stuff like that and finally I I
still had the vision that if we would
cut out any place for ourselves it had
to be to build a platform that really
would make everyone comfortable to use
it including big corporate so uh we were
brought on some people will experience
in in what does the corporate really
need to which boxes does the corporate
need to take it in order to venture into
a new into a new technology right that
being said and we often misunderstood
that way we're not the corporate
blockchain or something like that we are
a use case agnostic layer one and we
love and Achieve platforms and games
just as much as we love to help big
corporates you know so I just want to
stress that point because it's being
misunderstood sometimes but we also
allow to help corporates with uh with
industrial scale data use cases and and
these guys couldn't do it if we didn't
have some of the features that we had
yeah so when I'm when I'm going through
the website and I'm digging into
concordium you definitely get this kind
of consortia Enterprise chain same sort
of vibe but then you also go out of your
way to say we're onboarding defy uses
like we like GameFly we like nfts so
it's very obviously a public blockchain
but when I'm researching concordium the
three things that kind of stand out to
me that kind of really show that there
was a lot of thought that was put into
this and it's not just like a fly by the
night copy pasty VM chain is the
integration of an identity layer zero
knowledge proofs and a finality layer so
could you just share a little bit more
about those kind of like three key
things that really can make that native
integration a really useful chain for a
project that's exploring a new public
layer one blockchain yeah and you're
right in identifying those areas in
order to add one-on-one that's
scalability right and even one more one
that's fixed fees right that you can
predict to the cost you're gonna have to
execute a use case right because
something things that work fine on
ethereum in the beginning would be
prohibitively expensive to execute
directly on on a ethereum today right so
so we have a model of of fixed fees that
will only go down not up and we can do
that because it's a proof of state
blockchain which incidentally is another
thing that in my view I understand fully
the arguments behind proof of work but I
also see a very very significant problem
with the narrative because uh every
business in the world is now trying to
show that it's responsible and it's
energy use Etc and it's very hard to
reconcile the proof of work model with
with that narrative right so proof
mistake is also critical and actually
safe and my view then then proof of work
because doesn't lead to the same
concentrations as mining goes through
but but that's a more esoteric point but
I think proof of stake is safer than
proof of work but yes actually among the
scientists we also have some of the
world's leading scientists in in cereal
knowledge understanding and NPC
Etc multi-party Computing those aspects
I I think are critical certainly also
for D5 because D5 is an area that will
be particularly exposed to regulation
right and and I love D5 I think the way
there's so many areas you can you can
improve on the traditional Financial
system I know infinitely from having
been in it for decades uh the pain
points there and there are many it's not
inclusive because of all these pain
points right so there's a lot if I can
teach and and can benefit the
traditional Financial system and a lot
of innovation but they will be at the
Forefront of Regulation hence I think
that they would benefit from building on
a chain like ours where we do at least
some of that thinking for them and help
them Implement these things around ID
and kyc and in an easier way so those
things are critical of course finality
as you pointed out that is a very
underexposed subject in blockchain I
don't even think most people would
really understand importance of it but
finality is in essence that you have an
additional layer to the consensus layer
and that finality layer basically
decides that the last block mixer is
also de facto a new genesis block right
so anything before that last block
cannot be changed even if somebody
managed to gain control of the system
from a point there would be no way that
they could roll back everything that
happened in the past and you would know
exactly where the problem occurred and
be able to restart exactly from that
point in that very unlikely event
because it is hard to take control of a
decentralized system but but that's very
important because actually we know
already that you have to to wait for
several blocks in Bitcoin to be 100 sure
that the transaction has gone through
and that is with a with a nice work
called probabilistic finality right what
we do is deterministic finality that
this is finality and it cannot be rolled
back right and then certainly for if you
uh financial institution you want to
commit billions of dollars to a block
okay you need to have this you can't be
99.99 sure that nothing's going to go
wrong you've got to be 100 sure right
they're also for regulatory purposes so
the finality layer is very important
then of course scalability is very
important because we see we've seen now
an interesting situation in Bitcoin
right that actually finally with the
brc20 uh coins people are beginning to
try to use Bitcoin for something else
and what happens the system is massively
congested the tons of pending
traditional Bitcoin transactions and
fees go through the roof right and that
just shows that scalability is also an
issue and the only way you resort to
fixing that is by using layer twos but
layer two's in my view is corrupting the
idea of blockchain right because now you
are just like in the old world you're
going to introduce more points of
failure right and and if you use a layer
two that can do a lot of transactions
well I can tell you how they do that
they do that with a compromise and
security right because that's the only
way you can do it at this point so you
introduced using a new security risk and
a level of uncertainty and multiple
points of failure all of a sudden which
which to me is not what blockchain
should do you should construct a
blockchain where you can actually do all
of your core transactions directly on
that blockchain if you want to be true
to the DNA of blockchain so scalability
is hugely important right now we have
much higher scalability than Bitcoin or
ethereum obviously a biasmarter design
But ultimately also we need to create
even more scalability and the way to do
that is shotting right so we also have
some real experts on on sharding and
sharding again is a little misunderstood
because not hard to do sharding you just
basically take a copy of your blockchain
and position it in parallel and and copy
paste as you need for
scalability growth but the real problem
with sharding is not doing the shot it's
the intercommunication between the shots
so you don't end up with 1 000 people
sitting in one shot and they can
interact efficiently a thousand people
sitting in another shot and they can
interact efficiently but what happens
when one of them wants to deal with
somebody in the other shot and that's
the problem about starting and and
that's also something that we have some
really groundbreaking research on this
and once you solve that and we will
solve that or somebody else might do it
and then typically that would be free
open source uh science from universities
but we are very far progressed on that
journey and once you have that that you
have a true interoperability between the
shots and an infinite number of sharks
and then you also have infinite through
layer one scalability and that is the
Nirvana or blockchain and my view
introducing all these layer twos is a is
a Corruption of the idea I honestly
could spend another 15 to 20 minutes on
each of those five subsections to hear
more about how concordium is in
implementing these and kind of like the
progress that your research team is
making on things like sharding but we
only have like a few more minutes left
and I want to be cognizant of your time
so I kind of want to zoom out a little
bit and get a little bit bigger picture
so you conceptualize this after you were
called out in 2017 and you indeed went
and found a research team you started
building these five key areas you've
discussed have been pain points in the
various different popular networks over
the years individually over their own
time what is it like going out there and
I guess quote unquote selling this
vision
of this layer one that you created what
is the reception from Partnerships that
you're making or potential Enterprises
you're speaking with or even governments
or corporations are people receptive to
this message or are they kind of stuck
in the if it's not Bitcoin or ethereum
then we don't want to pay attention to
it Viewpoint I would say two things
around that culprits are certainly
receptive because they understand what
they need right when we go out we get a
an opportunity to present to a corporate
it gets their attention right also
because uh they're not very interested
in for example the size of the ecosystem
right the big selling point for ethereum
is it has a large ecosystem and that's
nice if you have something very crypto
native that you uh where you would like
immediate usage but a corporate use case
is often based on on something where
they want to secure their database
better they actually couldn't give a
task where the Bitcoin goes up or down
or whether you have a lot of your users
or not because that's not why they're
coming there right also then you have
the other layer where people that have
traditional big user bases for example
in the music industry a big band wants
to try to generate some additional
revenues and some more artistic Freedom
by by selling uh premium utility nfgs
right but 95 percent of that fan base is
not on the it's not on on in the crypto
native space anyway so they got to lead
people somewhere in order to achieve
what they do so also there I think the
value of a big ecosystem is fairly
relevant right now that being said and
that is the one place where I believe we
haven't been good enough is that of
course the crypto Natures are important
uh of course the early adopters here are
people that you should uh you should be
good to you should help you should have
at a very high point in your agenda I
think we have we have failed a little
bit on that and that's also why I was at
it's important for me to stress that
we're not this corporate chain image
right there so uh I'm the chairman of
the Concordia Foundation but I have
recently gotten more involved in the
operational side of it and and one of
the first things um I have done a lot of
work with Israel marketing and then the
narrative uh so that we we can actually
spread the word better out there also
among the crypts on age of space because
I think we have lots of stuff to offer
them but I also think we have maybe been
seen as somewhat irrelevant or maybe
even alienating a little bit by our talk
about you know regulations coming and
you need to address it right but I think
I think people are beginning to accept
that that's the way it is and that makes
us just more relevant than than ever but
we haven't been good at spreading the
word there and therefore concordium is a
pretty well kept secret you know and I'm
gonna change that as best I can right
because I I think it does have a high
degree of rather than scription either
the use cases and crypto native uses and
I I have a great deal of respect for the
Innovation that's happening in these
spaces because they are the ones that
are coming up with with brilliant new
ideas for how a better Financial system
could work how a better distribution
mechanism for artists music and art and
good work for all the Innovation happens
there so I really want to want to stress
the point that we're also there for that
segment and we have we have relevant
stuff to offer that maybe can make their
life a little bit easier and and we we
we love everything that's being created
by the sort of innovative edge of
blockchaining too but we also want to
make make corporates confident in in
venturing into this and interesting you
know we have uh we have like maybe a
little bit of spring now but we had a
crypto winter for a while where the
exchange is so dramatic drops and
volumes and the the retail uses sort of
step back there's been no change in
corporate interest that's just growing
and growing and growing you know and and
those guys are looking at it completely
uh from a different angle that maybe we
do in the crypto native space right so
they really don't care whether whether
Bitcoin goes up and or down they don't
need financing because they they can
Finance their own projects they don't
need big use of bases because either
they're going to bring them themselves
so they don't need them full stop so
that is a positive sign for me that I
give a number of sort of you know these
on the way home evening meetings for
c-level people you know arranged by some
of the advices and three or four years
ago you couldn't have collected 50
c-level people on a Thursday night on
their way back from the job and
listening to blockchain and today you
can they don't know much about it so
they're still appreciative of you trying
to simplify things they have this view
that blockchain is extremely complicated
I have the view that it's extremely
Simple Technology really I mean
obviously not the cryptographic stuff
but how a blockchain works is it's a lot
easier to explain than actually how the
internet works right so there's a
distinct development positive
development there that that people in
business want to know about this and
increasingly begin to see where maybe it
could serve a purpose in their in their
corner of business right well if you
think concordium is a well-kept secret
with 140 000 Twitter followers I'm
really looking forward to seeing what it
looks like when concordium is splashed
onto the mainstream and you've you've
achieved all the uh end users that are
accessing the network that you envision
well
so kind of I guess wrapping up if we
could look forward to two years where
we're definitely out of crypto winter
we're in Spring maybe we're in summer
who knows you've mentioned that you're
talking with sea level execs right now
but you're also looking to find the
crypto natives so in two years what
would be some of your dream projects
whether they're Dows nfts D5 whether
there is indeed a corporation that is
utilizing the concordium L1 in two years
what are some of the dream projects that
you would like to see actively building
in the ecosystem I think that the way
that this space is most likely kind of
the setup is that there's not going to
be a Winner Takes at all uh there's
going to be a number of not many not not
hundreds but uh maybe a dozen or so
leading layer ones some of them going to
be more successful than others but
there's going to be a number but not a
gigantic number of layer ones that find
in a space in this future economy if you
will right and I want to be one of those
right I don't have to be the biggest I'm
not looking for world domination and you
shouldn't do you shouldn't look for that
with a decentralized uh system anyway
right but but I would like to be one of
those block teams and and that means uh
supporting business and use cases across
a very broad spectrum right again what I
would like to contribute with concordium
is a safer digital world you know
because it's going to be a bigger part
of our Lives it's going to be perhaps
the dominant part of our life in in a
couple of decades maybe before
technology develops very fast and people
need to feel confident in in being in
this world right so I don't necessarily
have to do everything for a use case but
I would like to add that element of
confidence and safety that I sincerely
believe concordium can do and I would
like to we have some music projects I'm
involved in one directly also as an
investor and and it's very interesting
how how
artists have lost their revenue streams
in recent years Spotify has killed many
of the revenue streams and to give them
back some power over their own IP and
how they choose to distribute it how
they may be able to generate good income
streams from their super fans and
distinguish more between different fan
groups Etc it's also about giving these
people a better opportunity to to
actually also be allowed to make some
money on what they do so well and we all
we all have joy from every day and today
they're not right so that's just one
example it's also about helping people
getting more control of their product of
their lives of their ID and I think we
can play an important role in that but
people need to know that we're there
right I have very rarely a meeting with
somebody that might even have decided on
another blockchain that wouldn't walk
away from that meeting at least thinking
very carefully about their choice right
but you can't do this only through
meetings because that's like a question
of scalability right you you need to
have the viral effect of that and people
wanting to build and that's where I
believe we have failed to be honest that
we haven't made ourselves as visible as
I believe that the blockchain deserves
and and it it pains me a little bit to
see very mediocre projects out there
having tons of traction disappointing
their uses not working breaking down
when I know that there's a better
alternative but people don't know about
it but I can only look at one person for
that and that's the person I see in the
mirror in the morning and that's not a
very nice experience to begin with but I
have to take that responsibility and
change it and that's what I'm working
hard to do Lars um I honestly could keep
on talking with you for hours on end
it's fascinating to hear the experience
you've had in Innovative sectors and the
kind of determination you've had to to
stick them out and it's fascinating to
see the parallels of starting saxo and
the late 90s and starting concordium in
the late 2010s so really cool to hear
your insights very fascinating to hear
the directions in which you've
spearheaded the blockchain You're
Building along with your team I'm really
looking forward to following along
because I think those are the the five
areas you dug into are just phenomenal
aspects that blockchain can offer that
we still aren't even talking about today
so hopefully by the time like the
mainstream is kind of coming around to
the utility that blockchain networks can
give them things like zero knowledge
proofs and identity layers and finality
will really matter and when that starts
to take effect at the mainstream level
then your average retail investor will
really or even user will really take
heed in the blockchain networks they
choose to use so thank you so much for
spending an hour and sharing the vision
for concordium
and your backgrounds and your insights
they're very fascinating
um like I said I could have easily
stayed on this call for another two
hours but I want to respect your time
and and give that back to you so thank
you so much for coming to join the smart
economy podcast Lars it was truly a
pleasure thanks a lot for having me I
appreciate the conversation and uh we
can always take a temperature check
later on thanks a lot for having me
cheers and one last thing if there's one
way that users want to keep in contact
with what's going on over at concordium
what's the best way for them to do that
well say yeah we have all the usual
channels but uh if you go to
concordium.com the website you can
easily find the various telegram groups
githubs and what have you right so
concordium.com is a good entry point for
that awesome well thank you so much for
for joining the smart economy podcast
and would love to have you on at a later
time thanks a lot Dylan cheers
well what did you think of that
conversation I had such a fun time
chatting with an OG you know someone who
didn't hesitate to get involved with
Bitcoin within the first few years of
its emergence it was also really
interesting to hear firsthand experience
what it was like to build an online
trading platform in the late 90s
especially in the face of many who
doubted the potential of the technology
hearing Lars draw comparisons between
the emergence of the internet and
blockchain technology is something I
often think about myself but don't
really get a chance to discuss with
those who are building products back in
the day on that note I want to thank you
so much for taking the time to listen to
the smart economy podcast if you liked
what you heard and want to support the
show please keep Neo news today in mind
when voting for your Neo Council
representative as part of Neo's
governance process we appreciate you and
look for forward to catching you next
time